# >  RUST

## Dev code
/Users/stevenmendez/development/code/steven/rust


###Installed Software Rust:

        cargo installed                        8.46 MiB
       clippy installed                        2.89 MiB
    rust-docs installed                       21.33 MiB
     rust-std installed                       26.20 MiB
        rustc installed                       64.63 MiB
      rustfmt installed                        1.44 MiB 
      <br>
      info: default toolchain set to stable-aarch64-apple-darwin
      <br>

  stable-aarch64-apple-darwin installed - rustc 1.96.0 (ac68faa20 2026-05-25)
  <br>
  
$HOME/.cargo/bin
<br>
To configure your current shell, you need to source
the corresponding env file under $HOME/.cargo.
<br><br>
This is usually done by running one of the following (note the leading DOT):<br><br>
. "$HOME/.cargo/env"            # For sh/bash/zsh/ash/dash/pdksh<br>
source "$HOME/.cargo/env.fish"  # For fish<br>
source "~/.cargo/env.nu"        # For nushell<br>
source "$HOME/.cargo/env.tcsh"  # For tcsh<br>
. "$HOME/.cargo/env.ps1"        # For pwsh<br>
source "$HOME/.cargo/env.xsh"   # For xonsh<br>

### Shells
>pdksh<br>
>Fish shell<br>
>tcsh or csh<br>
>nushell<br>
>pwsh<br>
>xonsh https://xon.sh/<br>
<br>
To use Rust with the pdksh (Public Domain Korn Shell) environment, install Rust using rustup, the official installer. Because pdksh is POSIX-compliant , 
it requires the same initialization commands as Bash to properly set up your PATH and Cargo environment.<br>
.<br>
The file .cargo/env.ps1 pwsh is a PowerShell configuration script created by the Rust installer (rustup) on Windows systems<br>
.<br>
The file .cargo/env.tcsh tcsh or csh is a shell configuration script generated by the Rustup tool specifically for users of the tcsh or csh (C Shell) environments<br>
.<br>
The file .cargo/env.xsh xonsh is an environment setup script generated by rustup (Rust's toolchain installer) specifically for the xonsh shell. XONSH is a Python-powered shell<br>
.<br>
The Fish Shell codebase was completely rewritten in Rust from C++, officially launching with the stable release of Fish 4.0<br>

#### Fish

In the context of the Rust programming language, "fish" almost always refers to the Turbofish operator, written as ::<>, 
which is used to explicitly provide concrete types to generic functions or methods. Alternatively, it could refer to the popular command-line tool fish shell, 
which was recently completely rewritten in Rust.
<br>
The Turbofish Operator (::<>)Rust relies heavily on type inference to figure out types automatically. 
However, when the compiler does not have enough context to guess a generic type, you use the Turbofish Operator to state it explicitly
<br>
#### Fish shell - Installed
<br>
brew install fish<br>
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/fish/4.8.0: 317 files, 36.5MB<br>

Fish (Friendly Interactive SHell) is a smart, user-friendly command-line shell designed for Linux and macOS that prioritizes out-of-the-box usability over manual configuration. 
Unlike Bash or Zsh, which require heavy modification via plugins, the fish shell comes loaded with modern interactive features by default.
<br>
#### Nushell
The file ~/.cargo/env.nu is a shell configuration script generated by rustup specifically for users of Nushell
Nushell (or "Nu") is a modern, cross-platform command-line shell that treats all output as structured data (tables, records, and lists) rather than plain text

##Dependencies
>url: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/dependencies.html <br><br>
crates.io is the Rust community’s central package registry that serves as a location to discover and download packages. cargo is configured to use it by default to find requested packages.
<br>
To depend on a library hosted on crates.io, add it to your Cargo.toml.

##RUST Naming Convention
https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/naming.html

## Cargo Layout
> https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/project-layout.html

## Changes RUST RFCs
The “RFC” (request for comments)  https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/introduction.html

## UNUSED Variables WARNING
warning: unused variable: `my_text2` <br>
  --> src/main.rs:28:6<br>
  
  SOLUTIONS<br>
  1-put prefix _: _my_text2<br>
  2-RUSTFLAGS="-A unused_variables" cargo build<br>
  3-Configuration:<br> toml[lints.rust] <br>
unused_variables = "allow"<br>

## NUMBERS
Number types are divided into two groups: integer types and floating point types.

### Integer (i32)
```RUST
The i32 type is used to store whole numbers, positive or negative without decimals: <br>
let ageSteven: i32 = 40; <br>
println!("Steven Age is: {}", age); <br>
```

### Floating Point (f64)
The f64 type is used to store numbers containing one or more decimals <br>
```RUST
let dollarValue: f64 = 19.99; <br>
println!("dollarValue is: ${}", dollarValue); <br>
```

### String (&str)

```RUST
let nameSteven: &str = "Steven";
println!("Hello, {}!", nameSteven); <br>
```

### rust-clippy
Clippy is Rust's official collection of lints and checks designed to catch common mistakes, enforce idiomatic coding styles, and improve program performance .<br> 
It features over 550 rules covering everything from correctness and style to complexity and performance <br>
<br>https://doc.rust-lang.org/clippy/<br>
https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/issues/5875 <br>
push_str with a single-character string literal <br>
Clippy Warnings: If you use push_str with a single-character string literal (e.g., s.push_str("x")), Rust Clippy will warn you. <br>
It will advise using s.push('x') instead, as push is faster and skips the string parsing overhead.<br>

### Constants Must Have a Type
```RUST
const BIRTHYEARSTEVEN: i32 = 1980; // Ok
const BIRTHYEARSTEVEN = 1980; // Error: missing type
```

### Rust Ownership
* Rust uses "ownership" to manage memory in a safe way.

* Every value in Rust has an owner. The owner is usually a variable.

## Ownership Rules

* Each value has one owner
* When the owner goes out of scope, the value is deleted
* You can only have one owner at a time, unless you borrow it

## Rust Borrowing
For example lets analyze this code:
```RUST
	// println!("{}", a); Error: a no longer owns the value
	println!("{}", b); // Ok: b now owns the value
	println!("{}", a); 
	
	cargo build:
	
	error[E0382]: borrow of moved value: `a`
   --> src/main.rs:186:17
    |
181 |     let a = String::from("Hello");
    |         - move occurs because `a` has type `String`, which does not implement the `Copy` trait
182 |     let b = a;
    |             - value moved here
...
186 |     println!("{}", a); 
    |                    ^ value borrowed here after move
    |
help: consider cloning the value if the performance cost is acceptable
    |
182 |     let b = a.clone();
    |              ++++++++

```
## Why Ownership Matters
- Rust uses ownership to automatically free memory when it's no longer needed
- It prevents bugs like using memory that's already been deleted
- It is one of the reasons Rust is so safe and fast
